Add `cheriot-audit` docs & exercises (#46)
lowRISC/sonata-software: exercises/firmware_auditing/README.md

-->
# Firmware Auditing Exercise

First, make sure to go to the [building the exercises][] section to see how the exercises are built.

[building the exercises]: ../README.md#building-the-exercises

You might find it useful to look at the [auditing firmware][] documentation to get a brief introduction to `cheriot-audit` and the Rego policy language.

[auditing firmware]: ../../doc/auditing-firmware.md

In this exercise, we use the `cheriot-audit` tool to audit the JSON firmware reports produced by the CHERIoT RTOS linker.
This will let us assert a properties about our firmware images at link-time, guaranteeing desired safety checks.
This exercise explores a set of self-contained policies which audit a variety of properties, to give an idea of what can be achieved using CHERIoT Audit.

For this exercise, when the `xmake.lua` build file is mentioned, we are referring to [`exercises/firmware_auditing/xmake.lua`][].

[`exercises/firmware_auditing/xmake.lua`]: ../../exercises/firmware_auditing/xmake.lua

## Part 1 - check that firmware contains no sealed capabilities

Policies are written using the *Rego* language, which has syntax that may be unfamiliar.

> If you find yourself confused whilst going through this exercise, it might be helpful to read over the [introduction to Rego][] in  the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you find yourself confused whilst going through this exercise, it might be helpful to read over the [introduction to Rego][] in the documentation.
```

              --module=exercises/firmware_auditing/part_3/malloc_check.rego \
              --query='data.malloc_check.valid'
```

In this instance, the output of this test should be `true`, as our defined firmware meets these properties.
You can check this yourself by looking at the source files and the values of the intermediary rules.
To test that the policy is working, you can either change the amount of memory allocated by the firmware (making sure to rebuild), or change the policy itself to enforce lower limits.
For example, changing the line
```
all_allocations_leq(20480)  # 20 KiB
```
to the new line
```
all_allocations_leq(10240)  # 10 KiB
```
should cause the `valid` rule of the policy to evaluate to `false`, because the `malloc_many` compartment contains a capability that permits the allocation of 16 KiB at once, which is greater than our specified limits.

Try playing around with these values to convince yourself that the policy is working as we expect it to.

## Beyond these exercises

There are other pieces of information that the linker exposes, which we do not use in this exercise. For example:

>  - You could check that only certain compartments access certain MMIO capabilities.
>  This is covered in the third part of the [hardware access control][] exercise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - You could check that only certain compartments access certain MMIO capabilities.
   This is covered in the third part of the [hardware access control][] exercise.
```

<!--
Copyright lowRISC Contributors.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-->
# Firmware Auditing Exercise

First, make sure to go to the [building the exercises][] section to see how the exercises are built.

[building the exercises]: ../README.md#building-the-exercises

Next, go to the [auditing firmware][] documentation section to get a brief introduction to `cheriot-audit` and the Rego policy language.

> Part 3 of the [hardware access control] exercise also shows a simple example of using CHERIoT Audit to ensure that compartments do not access MMIO capabilities they should not be accessing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may also be interested in doing the [hardware access control][] exercise in uses CHERIoT Audit in it's part 3 to ensure that compartments do not access MMIO capabilities they should not be accessing.
```

Author: Moved this to the last section instead as suggested later, but I've still tried to make it more of a suggestion there and clearly not a requirement.

[auditing firmware]: ../../doc/auditing-firmware.md
[hardware access control]: ../hardware_access_control/README.md#part-3

In this exercise, we use the `cheriot-audit` tool to audit the JSON firmware reports produced by the CHERIoT RTOS linker.
This will let us assert a properties about our firmware images at link-time, guaranteeing desired safety checks.
This exercise explores a set of self-contained policies which audit a variety of properties, to give an idea of what can be achieved using CHERIoT Audit.

For this exercise, when the `xmake.lua` build file is mentioned, we are referring to [`exercises/firmware_auditing/xmake.lua`][].

[`exercises/firmware_auditing/xmake.lua`]: ../../exercises/firmware_auditing/xmake.lua

> ## A quick introduction to Rego

Reviewer: This is a little heavy for the start of a tutorial. We want to get them playing. This section could be moved to the explanation in `doc/auditing-firmware`. Then you can nudge them to read this section with a link to it in the first sentence of part one.

Author: I agree. I've made this change, and added a little forewarning at the top of part 1 to tell them that Rego syntax might be unfamiliar and if they find themselves confused they should check the primer.

Rego is a policy language designed similarly to Datalog, which is a declarative logic inference programming language.
As such, much of Rego's semantics will be familiar if you already know a logic programming language like Prolog, ASP or Datalog.
Otherwise, it may be unfamiliar and unintuitive otherwise.

> If you have no such prior experience, it is highligy recommend to read over the [Rego documentation][].

Author: Oops - I also typo'd `recommended` as `recommend`. Fixed that as well.

- You can interpret the rule syntax `a := b {c}` as meaning `a IS b IF c`.
- `:=` is the assignment operator.
It assigns values to locally scoped variables/rules.
- `==` is the comparison operator, and checks for JSON equality.
- `=` is the *unification* operator.
It combines assignment and comparison, with Rego assigning (binding) variables to values that make the comparison true.
This lets you declaratively ask for values that make an expression true.

If the body of a rule will never evaluate to `true`, e.g. `v if "a" = "b"`, then the rule is `undefined`.
This means that any expressions using its value will also be `undefined`.

> ℹ️ There is a notable exception to this rule: the `not` keyword acts as follows.
> If the value is `true`, then `not true` is `false`.
Otherwise, if the value is anything else, *including `undefined`*, then the negation of that value is `true`.

Each rule can have multiple conditions.
Rule bodies, marked by braces, are either delimited by semi-colons, or require you to separate individual expressions with newlines.

> Note here that Rego has **whitespace-dependent semantics**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note here that Rego has whitespace-dependent semantics.*
```

Bold feels a little strong

However, it may not immediately be clear why the policy failed.
When designing such a policy, you can see that it may be helpful to have a rule that lets us inspect the details of any sealed capabilities.
We do this with our final `sealed_capability_info` rule, which constructs ojects storing the contents, key, and compartment of each sealed capability.

> ℹ️ Note the use of unification here.
> We iterate over `input.compartments` with the non-defined variable `owner`, and then map the value that is bound this variable to the `owner` field of our new object.

Now, run the `cheriot-audit` command again, but replace `data.no_seal.valid` with `data.no_seal.sealed_capability_info`.
You should see an output that looks something like this:

```json
[{"compartment":"alloc", "contents":"00100000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000",
  "key":"MallocKey", "owner":"sealed_capability"}]
```

This tells us where the sealed capabilty in our firmware originates - a static sealed object owned by our `sealed_capability` compartment, which is used by the RTOS' allocator for authorising memory allocation.
Try experimenting by adding more functionality to this toy example!

> For example, try adding some functionality that might cause the RTOS' scheduler's `InterruptKey` static sealed object to be added.

Reviewer: I love the go play parts here! However, as a newbie, I'd have no idea how to do this.

Author: That makes sense - instead I'll suggest they try adding their own sealed capabilities (for people who already know how to do that), or change the policy itself to investigate what other types of e.g. capabilities they might filter and audit.

[`xmake.lua`]: ../../exercises/firmware_auditing/xmake.lua
[`disable_interrupts.cc`]: ../../exercises/firmware_auditing/part_2/disable_interrupts.cc
[`bad_disable_interrupts.cc`]: ../../exercises/firmware_auditing/part_2/bad_disable_interrupts.cc

As in the last exercise, we first declare an `interrupts` package, to allow us to use `data.interrupts` in our queries.
We then start by defining which functions in which compartments are allowed to run with interrupts disabled.
We do this by using a list, with each item in this list containing the name of the compartment, and a list of the function signatures that can run with interrupts disabled.

We allow two specific functions to run without interrupts in the `disable_interrupts` compartment, and allow none to run in the `bad_disable_interrupts` compartment.
Despite this, if you check the the source files, `not_allowed` is actually running with interrupts disabled.
In a practical scenario, `disable_interrupts` might be a trusted library, where `bad_disable_interrupts` is only allowed to call functions from `disable_interrupts`, and not disable interrupts itself.

> We can then also use this list to construct a smaller set containing just the compartments we expect to be present, which will be useful, as the first condition that we want to check is that all (and only) the required compartments are present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can then use this list to construct a smaller set containing just the compartments we expect to be present, which will be useful as the first condition that we want to check is that all (and only) the required compartments are present.
```

              --module=exercises/firmware_auditing/part_3/malloc_check.rego \
              --query='data.malloc_check.valid'
```

In this instance, the output of this test should be `true`, as our defined firmware meets these properties.
You can check this yourself by looking at the source files and the values of the intermediary rules.
To test that the policy is working, you can either change the amount of memory allocated by the firmware (making sure to rebuild), or change the policy itself to enforce lower limits.
For example, changing the line
```
all_allocations_leq(20480)  # 20 KiB
```
to the new line
```
all_allocations_leq(10240)  # 10 KiB
```
should cause the `valid` rule of the policy to evaluate to `false`, because the `malloc_many` compartment contains a capability that permits the allocation of 16 KiB at once, which is greater than our specified limits.

Try playing around with these values to convince yourself that the policy is working as we expect it to.

## Beyond these exercises

There are other pieces of information that the linker exposes, which we do not use in this exercise. For example:

>  - You could check that only certain compartments access certain MMIO capabilities.

Reviewer: Maybe link to part 3 of the other exercise here. *You could even not mention it at the beginning and only here.*
